some of my most wonderful memories of
childhood are of spending time with my
grandmother mom are in our four family
home in Brooklyn New York
her apartment was an oasis it was a
place where I could sneak a cup of
coffee which was really warm milk with
just like a touch of caffeine she loved
life and although she worked in a
factory she saved her pennies and she
traveled to Europe and I remember poring
over those pictures with her and then
dancing with her to her favorite music
and then when I was 8 and she was 60
something changed
she no longer worked or traveled she no
longer danced there were no more coffee
times my mother missed work and took her
to doctors who couldn't make a diagnosis
and my father who worked at night would
spend every afternoon with her just to
make sure she ate her care became
all-consuming for our family and by time
a diagnosis was made she was in a deep
spiral now many of you will recognize
her symptoms
my grandmother had depression a deep
life-altering depression from which she
never recovered and back then so little
was known about depression but even
today 50 years later there's still so
much more to learn today we know that
women are 70% more likely to experience
depression over their lifetimes compared
with men and even with this high
prevalence women are misdiagnosed
between 30 and 50 percent of the time
now we know that women are more likely
to experience the symptoms of fatigue
sleep disturbed
pain and anxiety compared with men and
these symptoms are often overlooked as
symptoms of depression and it isn't only
depression in which these sex
differences occur but they occur across
so many diseases so it's my
grandmother's struggles that have really
led me on a lifelong quest and today I
lead a Center in which the mission is to
discover why these sex differences occur
and to use that knowledge to improve the
health of women today we know that every
cell has a sex now that's a term coined
by the Institute of Medicine and what it
means is that men and women are
different down to the cellular and
molecular levels it means that we're
different across all of our organs from
our brains to our hearts our lungs our
joints now it was only 20 years ago that
we hardly had any data on women's health
beyond our reproductive functions but
then in 1993 the NIH revitalization Act
was signed into law and what this law
did was it mandated that women and
minorities be included in clinical
trials that were funded by the National
Institutes of Health and in many ways
the law has worked women are now
routinely included in clinical studies
and we've learned that there are major
differences in the ways that women and
men experience disease but remarkably
what we have learned about these
differences is often overlooked so we
have to ask ourselves the question why
leave women's health to chance and we're
leaving it to chance in two ways the
first is that there is so much more to
learn and we're not making the
investment in fully understanding the
extent of these sex differences
and the second is that we aren't taking
what we have learned and routinely
applying it in clinical care we are just
not doing enough so I'm going to share
with you three examples of where sex
differences have impacted the health of
women and where we need to do more let's
start with heart disease it's the number
one killer of women in the United States
today this is the face of heart disease
Linda is a middle-aged woman who had a
stent placed in one of the arteries
going to her heart when she had
recurrent symptoms she went back to her
doctor her doctor did the gold standard
test a cardiac catheterization it showed
no blockages Linda's symptoms continued
she had to stop working and that's when
she found us when Linda came to us we
did another cardiac catheterization and
this time we found Clues but we needed
another test to make the diagnosis so we
did a test called an intra coronary
ultrasound where you use sound waves to
look at the artery from the inside out
and what we found was that Linda's
disease didn't look like the typical
male disease the typical male disease
looks like this there's a discrete
blockage or stenosis
Linda's disease like the disease of so
many women looks like this the plaque is
laid down more evenly more diffusely
along the artery and it's harder to see
so for Linda and for so many women the
gold standard test wasn't gold now Linda
received the right treatment she went
back to her life and fortunately today
she is doing well but Linda was lucky
she found us we found her disease but
for too many women that's not the case
we have the tools we have the technology
to make the diagnosis
it's all too often that these sex
differences are overlooked so what about
treatment a landmark study that was
published two years ago asked the very
important question what are the most
effective treatments for heart disease
in women the authors looked at papers
written over a 10-year period and
hundreds had to be thrown out and what
they found out was that of those that
were tossed out sixty-five percent were
excluded because even though women were
included in the studies the analysis
didn't differentiate between women and
men
what a lost opportunity you know the
money had been spent and we didn't learn
how women fared and these studies could
not contribute one iota to the very very
important question what are the most
effective treatments for heart disease
in women I want to introduce you to
Hortense my godmother
Heung whay a relative of a colleague and
somebody you may recognize Dana
Christopher Reeves wife all three women
have something very important in common
all three were diagnosed with lung
cancer the number one cancer killer of
women in the United States today all
three were non-smokers
sadly Dana and home way died of their
disease today what we know is that women
who are non-smokers are three times more
likely to be diagnosed with lung cancer
than are men who are non-smokers now
interestingly when women are diagnosed
with lung cancer
their survival tends to be better than
that of men now here are some clues our
investigators have found that there are
certain genes and the lung tumor cells
of both women and men and these genes
are activated mainly by estrogen and
when these genes are overexpressed its
associated
with improved survival only in young
women now this is a very early finding
and we don't yet know whether it has
relevance to clinical care but its
findings like this that may provide hope
and may provide an opportunity to save
lives of both women and men now let me
share with you an example of when we do
consider sex differences it can drive
the science several years ago a new lung
cancer drug was being evaluated and when
the authors looked at whose tumors
shrank
they found that 82% were women
this led them to ask the question well
why and what they found was that the
genetic mutations that the drug targeted
were far more common in women and what
this has led to is a more personalized
approach to the treatment of lung cancer
that also includes sex this is what we
can accomplish when we don't leave
women's health to chance we know that
when you invest in research you get
results take a look at the death rate
from breast cancer over time and now
take a look at the death rates from lung
cancer in women over time now let's look
at the dollars invested in breast cancer
these are the dollars invested per death
and the dollars invested in lung cancer
now it's clear that our investment in
breast cancer has produced results they
may not be fast enough but it has
produced results we can do the same for
lung cancer and for every other disease
so let's go back to depression
depression is the number one cause of
disability in women in the world today
our investigators have found that there
are differences in the brains of women
and men in the areas that are connected
with mood and when you put men in women
in a functional MRI scanner that's the
kind of scanner that shows how the brain
is functioning when it's activated so
you
put them in the scanner and you expose
them to stress you can actually see the
difference and its findings like this
that we believe holds some of the clues
for why we see these very significant
sex differences in depression but even
though we know that these differences
occur 66 percent of the brain research
that begins in animals is done in either
male animals or animals in whom the sex
is not identified so I think we have to
ask again the question why leave women's
health to chance and this is a question
that haunts those of us in science and
medicine who believe that we are on the
verge of being able to dramatically
improve the health of women we know that
every cell has a sex we know that these
differences are often overlooked and
therefore we know that women are not
getting the full benefit of modern
science and medicine today we have the
tools but we lack the collective will
and momentum women's health is an equal
rights issue as important as equal pay
and it's an issue of the quality and the
integrity of science and medicine
[Applause]
so imagine the momentum we could achieve
in advancing the health of women if we
considered whether these sex differences
were present at the very beginning of
designing research or if we analyze
their data by sex so people often ask me
what can I do and here's what I suggest
first I suggest that you think about
women's health in the same way that you
think and care about other causes that
are important to you
and second and equally as important that
as a woman you have to ask your doctor
and the doctors who are caring for those
who you love is this disease or
treatment different in women now this is
a profound question because the answer
is likely yes
but your doctor may not know the answer
at least not yet
but if you ask the question your doctor
will very likely go looking for the
answer and this is so important not only
for ourselves but for all of those whom
we love whether it be a mother a
daughter a sister a friend or a
grandmother it was my grandmother's
suffering that inspired my work to
improve the health of women that's her
legacy our legacy can be to improve the
health of women for this generation and
for generations to come
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]